labs/day1-labs/06-monitoring-k8s.md, before:

# Add Monitoring to an Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster

There are a number of monitoring solutions available today. Here is a quick, but not exhaustive list for reference purposes:
* Datadog
* Sysdig
* Elastic Stack
* Splunk
* Operations Management Suite
* Prometheus

For the purposes of this lab we will be focusing in on Prometheus and using Grafana to provide a visual Dashboard of our Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster.

## Install Helm

We are going to be installing Prometheus and Grafana into our K8s cluster using Helm and Tiller. You can think of Helm as a package manager for Kubernetes with Tiller being the server-side component.

1. In the Azure Cloud Shell, the Helm CLI is already installed

2. If your AKS cluster has RBAC enabled (which is the case by default with Kuberentes version 1.10+), you need first to [create a Service Account for Tiller](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/kubernetes-helm#create-a-service-account) by running:
    ```
    cd ~/blackbelt-aks-hackfest/labs/helper-files

    kubectl create -f helm-rbac.yaml
    ```

3. Initialize Helm
    ```
    helm init --service-account tiller
    ```

4. Validate Helm and Tiller were installed successfully
    ```
    helm version
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    Client: &version.Version{SemVer:"v2.11.0", GitCommit:"9ad53aac42165a5fadc6c87be0dea6b115f93090", GitTreeState:"clean"}
    Server: &version.Version{SemVer:"v2.11.0", GitCommit:"9ad53aac42165a5fadc6c87be0dea6b115f93090", GitTreeState:"clean"}
    ```

## Install Prometheus using Helm
Prometheus is a Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) project used to collect and process metrics. It collects metrics from configured targets, in our case it is a Kubernetes Cluster.

1. Install Prometheus using Helm CLI

    Switch to the `helper-files` directory and view the `prometheus-configforhelm.yaml` file. This configures Helm to install Prometheus with our desired settings.
    ```
    cd ~/blackbelt-aks-hackfest/labs/helper-files
    # The following command will install Prometheus into the K8s cluster using custom settings

    helm install --name gbbhackprometheus stable/prometheus --version 4.6.13 -f prometheus-configforhelm.yaml
    ```

2. Validate that Prometheus was Installed
    ``` 
    kubectl get pods | grep prometheus
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-kube-state-metrics-5b9f4d9d9-vctrx   1/1       Running   0          3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-node-exporter-v6frn                  1/1       Running   0          3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server-54f5bcb797-sbzsp              2/2       Running   0          3m
    ```

    ```
    kubectl get svc | grep prometheus
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-kube-state-metrics   ClusterIP      None           <none>          80/TCP           3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-node-exporter        ClusterIP      None           <none>          9100/TCP         3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server               LoadBalancer   10.0.212.145   52.168.100.25   9090:32340/TCP   3m
    ```

## Install Grafana
Grafana is a dashboard visualization tool that can use all kinds of data sources. In our case, Prometheus will be used as the data source.

1. Install Grafana using Helm CLI
    The following command will install Grafana into the K8s cluster with a few custom settings to make it easier to access.
    * We are setting the default username and password to **admin** to make it easier to remember
    * We are also setting the service type to **LoadBalancer** to expose the service outside of the cluster and make it accessible via the Internet

    ```
    helm install --name gbbhackgrafana stable/grafana --version 0.5.1 --set server.service.type=LoadBalancer,server.adminUser=admin,server.adminPassword=admin,server.image=grafana/grafana:latest,server.persistentVolume.enabled=false
    ```

2. Validate that Grafana was Installed
    ```
    kubectl get pods | grep grafana
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    hgrafana-grafana-855db78dc4-pnzth                           1/1       Running   0          2h
    ```

    ```
    kubectl get svc | grep grafana
    # You should see something like the following as output, take note of the **EXTERNAL-IP column**:
    khgrafana-grafana                            LoadBalancer   10.0.163.226   "52.226.75.38"     80:31476/TCP   2h
    ```

3. Test Grafana UI Comes Up
Use the EXTERNAL-IP value from the previous step and put that into your browser:
    * eg. http://52.226.75.38, EXTERNAL-IP column from above. You should see something like the following come up, be patient it will take a moment or two:

    ![](img/8-grafana_default.png)

## Setting up Grafana
1. Log into Grafana Dashboard using **admin** for the username and password
    * You should see something like the following:

    ![](img/8-grafana_loggedin.png)

2. Add Prometheus as a Data Source
    * If you recall from above, we exposed a number of K8s services, one of those services was the Prometheus Server. We are going to use that Service endpoint in our Data Service configuration. The Add Data Source screen should look something like the below screen shot.

    > Use `http://gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server:9090` for the URL in the HTTP settings.

    ![](img/8-grafana_datasource.png)

3. Validate Prometheus Data Source
    * Once you have filled in the values similar to the screenshot above, click the **Add** button and ensure no errors come back.

4. Add K8s Monitoring Dashboard to Grafana
    * After the datasource has been added, it is now time to add a dashboard. Grafana dashboards can be shared on Grafana.com. Go to import dashboards via the menu in the top left.

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardimport.png)

    * Click on the **Upload File** button and browse to the `grafana-dashboard.json` in the `helper-files` directory. You can also paste the contents of the json into the text box.

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardid.png)

    * Set the datasource dropdown to the "AKSPrometheus" that was created in the previous step. 

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardsave.png)

    * Click the **Import** button.

    ![](img/8-grafana_k8sdashboard.png)

    You should now have Prometheus and Grafana running in your Azure Kubernetes Service cluster and be able to see the Grafana Dashboard.

Commit message:

Making the lab to work on RBAC enabled AKS

labs/day1-labs/06-monitoring-k8s.md, after:

# Add Monitoring to an Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster

There are a number of monitoring solutions available today. Here is a quick, but not exhaustive list for reference purposes:
* Datadog
* Sysdig
* Elastic Stack
* Splunk
* Operations Management Suite
* Prometheus

For the purposes of this lab we will be focusing in on Prometheus and using Grafana to provide a visual Dashboard of our Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster.

## Install Helm

We are going to be installing Prometheus and Grafana into our K8s cluster using Helm and Tiller. You can think of Helm as a package manager for Kubernetes with Tiller being the server-side component.

1. In the Azure Cloud Shell, the Helm CLI is already installed

2. Initialize Helm
    ```
    helm init
    ``` 
3. Validate Helm and Tiller were installed successfully
    ```
    helm version
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    Client: &version.Version{SemVer:"v2.9.1", GitCommit:"8478fb4fc723885b155c924d1c8c410b7a9444e6", GitTreeState:"clean"}
    Server: &version.Version{SemVer:"v2.9.1", GitCommit:"8478fb4fc723885b155c924d1c8c410b7a9444e6", GitTreeState:"clean"}
    ```
    **Note:** If you are receiving an error saying "Error: could not find a ready tiller pod", run the command  "helm init --force-upgrade" to forcefully initiate HELM and check the HELM version again. 
5. If the cluster is RBAC enabled, tiller Pod would not have enough permission in the default namespace. To fix this we need to create a ClusterRole, ClusterRoleBinding and a Service Account. With this we can give necessary permission to Tiller
 
    ```
    kubectl create serviceaccount --namespace kube-system tiller

    kubectl create clusterrolebinding tiller-cluster-rule --clusterrole=cluster-admin --serviceaccount=kube-system:tiller

    kubectl patch deploy --namespace kube-system tiller-deploy -p '{\"spec\":{\"template\":{\"spec\":{\"serviceAccount\":\"tiller\"}}}}'
    ```

## Install Prometheus using Helm
Prometheus is a Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) project used to collect and process metrics. It collects metrics from configured targets, in our case it is a Kubernetes Cluster.

1. Install Prometheus using Helm CLI

    Switch to the `helper-files` directory and view the `prometheus-configforhelm.yaml` file. This configures Helm to install Prometheus with our desired settings.
    ```
    cd ~/blackbelt-aks-hackfest/labs/helper-files
    # The following command will install Prometheus into the K8s cluster using custom settings

    helm install --name gbbhackprometheus stable/prometheus --version 4.6.13 -f prometheus-configforhelm.yaml
    ```

2. Validate that Prometheus was Installed
    ``` 
    kubectl get pods | grep prometheus
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-kube-state-metrics-5b9f4d9d9-vctrx   1/1       Running   0          3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-node-exporter-v6frn                  1/1       Running   0          3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server-54f5bcb797-sbzsp              2/2       Running   0          3m
    ```

    ```
    kubectl get svc | grep prometheus
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-kube-state-metrics   ClusterIP      None           <none>          80/TCP           3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-node-exporter        ClusterIP      None           <none>          9100/TCP         3m
    gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server               LoadBalancer   10.0.212.145   52.168.100.25   9090:32340/TCP   3m
    ```

## Install Grafana
Grafana is a dashboard visualization tool that can use all kinds of data sources. In our case, Prometheus will be used as the data source.

1. Install Grafana using Helm CLI
    The following command will install Grafana into the K8s cluster with a few custom settings to make it easier to access.
    * We are setting the default username and password to **admin** to make it easier to remember
    * We are also setting the service type to **LoadBalancer** to expose the service outside of the cluster and make it accessible via the Internet

    ```
    helm install --name gbbhackgrafana stable/grafana --version 0.5.1 --set server.service.type=LoadBalancer,server.adminUser=admin,server.adminPassword=admin,server.image=grafana/grafana:latest,server.persistentVolume.enabled=false
    ```

2. Validate that Grafana was Installed
    ```
    kubectl get pods | grep grafana
    # You should see something like the following as output:
    hgrafana-grafana-855db78dc4-pnzth                           1/1       Running   0          2h
    ```

    ```
    kubectl get svc | grep grafana
    # You should see something like the following as output, take note of the **EXTERNAL-IP column**:
    khgrafana-grafana                            LoadBalancer   10.0.163.226   "52.226.75.38"     80:31476/TCP   2h
    ```

3. Test Grafana UI Comes Up
Use the EXTERNAL-IP value from the previous step and put that into your browser:
    * eg. http://52.226.75.38, EXTERNAL-IP column from above. You should see something like the following come up, be patient it will take a moment or two:

    ![](img/8-grafana_default.png)

## Setting up Grafana
1. Log into Grafana Dashboard using **admin** for the username and password
    * You should see something like the following:

    ![](img/8-grafana_loggedin.png)

2. Add Prometheus as a Data Source
    * If you recall from above, we exposed a number of K8s services, one of those services was the Prometheus Server. We are going to use that Service endpoint in our Data Service configuration. The Add Data Source screen should look something like the below screen shot.

    > Use `http://gbbhackprometheus-prometheus-server:9090` for the URL in the HTTP settings.

    ![](img/8-grafana_datasource.png)

3. Validate Prometheus Data Source
    * Once you have filled in the values similar to the screenshot above, click the **Add** button and ensure no errors come back.

4. Add K8s Monitoring Dashboard to Grafana
    * After the datasource has been added, it is now time to add a dashboard. Grafana dashboards can be shared on Grafana.com. Go to import dashboards via the menu in the top left.

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardimport.png)

    * Click on the **Upload File** button and browse to the `grafana-dashboard.json` in the `helper-files` directory. You can also paste the contents of the json into the text box.

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardid.png)

    * Set the datasource dropdown to the "AKSPrometheus" that was created in the previous step. 

    ![](img/8-grafana_dashboardsave.png)

    * Click the **Import** button.

    ![](img/8-grafana_k8sdashboard.png)

    You should now have Prometheus and Grafana running in your Azure Kubernetes Service cluster and be able to see the Grafana Dashboard.
